Birds and their glosses
át kawdliyeeji át, ‘bird’/’fowl’, may be used in two senses as a general term for grouse (i.e. ‘fowl’) and to refer to all birds. This suggests that grouse may be seen as prototypical birds. If a bird enters your house it is a sign that something bad will happen (FS).

	1 t’aawák, Canada Goose Branta canadensis, is probably onomatopoeic and commonly known as the ‘Canadian goose’, ‘honker’ or ‘goose’. A large, dark-bellied non-migratory race of Canada Goose Branta canadensis fulva nests in south-east Alaska. Two additional subspecies of Canada Goose plus three forms of the smaller Cackling Goose Branta hutchinsii pass through on migration. There is no evidence that Tlingit differentiate between the various forms of Canada Goose and Cackling Geese, though Tlingit note that some Canada Geese are year-round residents while others are passage migrants. Tlingit harvest eggs of the resident Canadas but prefer to hunt southbound migrants or wintering birds, which, in the past, might be caught in snares or killed when trapped in ice. Today goose may be served as the main dish for Thanksgiving and Christmas feasts. Some places are defined by the presence or migratory appearance of this bird, including the Taku River, from T’aawák K’u, ‘Where the Canada Geese Flood’, a reference to the rich glacial forelands and shallow lagoons near the mouth of the river corridor between the south-east Alaskan coast and Canadian interior, where Canada Geese used to gather in great numbers (Emmons, undated; Nyman and Leer, 1993).

	2 kín, Brant Branta bernicla, migrant, most common in spring along saltwa- ter shores; rare at other seasons. Nests in tundra to the north and north-west. kín kwáani refers to a ‘flock of migrating ducks’, though perhaps it refers to a Brant flock or a flock of scoters (‘black ducks’ in the local vernacular), which are often found in bays and estuaries. In the local vernacular, ‘brant’ may refer also to the Greater White-fronted Goose Anser albifrons, and ‘brant’ may have either black (Brant) or yellow (Greater White-fronted Goose) feet. Brant are hunted and eaten, and are said to taste much the same as Canada Geese. Their spring appearance is associated with the return of key fish species, such as herring and spring salmon. Snow Geese Chen caerulescens are known by their English name and ‘stop by’ occasionally.

	3 gúkl’, Swans Cygnus spp. The Trumpeter Swan (C. buccinator) nests rarely and is uncommon spring and autumn, rare in winter, though it may be found consistently in some areas as indicated in several Tlingit place names. The Tundra Swan C. columbianus nests to the north and is a common autumn migrant, uncommon in spring, rare in winter. There is no evidence that Tlingit distinguish between the two, though the Tlingit name might more closely mimic calls of the Trumpeter Swan. Big flocks of migrating swans sometimes stay a week or two. They are hunted for their meat and feathers, both highly regarded. The name ‘swan’ is a noble name or title among certain Raven clans, such as the T’akdeintaan. Swan, brant and goose are all crests of Tlingit Raven clans.

gáaxw, ducks (28 species occur regularly, 15 common, 7 uncommon, 6 rare; 19 species nest), and includes White-winged Scoters and goldeneyes (see below). Bays, coves and shorelines are often inhabited or frequented by several species of ducks.

	4 Kindachooneit, Mallard Anas platyrhynchos, means ‘going straight up’, descriptive of how Mallards leap into the air when flushed, in contrast to the ‘airliner’-style take-off of larger waterfowl. This duck is common all year, nests on the ground near fresh water and forages in tidal areas and adjacent shores. The local term ‘mallard’ may be used to refer more broadly to include Green-winged Teal Anas crecca, Northern Pintail Anas acuta and/or Canvasbacks Aythya valisineria, among others, as targets of local hunters. Ducks are hunted with shotguns or sometimes caught when frozen in ice, said to have happened more often in years past when winters were colder than they are today (AG). Some local hunters prefer migratory Mallards, complaining that local nesters taste ‘fishy’ (CJ).

	5 atsik’íye, variously identified as a Canvasback Aythya valisineria (uncom- mon), scaup Aythya marila, A. affinis (both common) or teal Anas crecca (common), A. discors (uncommon), A. cyanoptera (rare). The local term ‘bluebill’ most probably refers to the scaup, considered to be an important gamebird. Rafts of hundreds might shelter in bays in stormy weather; 20 to 50 birds might be killed by a single shotgun blast when in such rafts.

	6 s’elasheesh, a ‘flat-headed duck’, identified as a teal or perhaps a scaup (Leer, 1995), but a teal is more likely (see above, atsik’íye).

	7 s’ús’ or hinyík káawu, Harlequin Duck Histrionicus histrionicus, nests in swift-flowing streams but for the rest of the year is common along rocky saltwater shores. The latter name means that it ‘lives in a river’ (CJ). Not a favourite target, but may be hunted for their meat and colourful plumage. ‘This is a species of duck said always to be seen sitting on rock in rivers. It makes a cry, sus’, when alarmed ... not with his mouth, but with his wings when he starts to fly up’ (Leer, 1995).

	8 yaa.aa.uné or aa.aa.uné, Long-tailed Duck Clangula hyemalis, ‘oldsquaw’ or ‘pintail’ locally, probably onomatopoeic, though it may be interpreted in Tlingit as ‘This is my country’. Common most of the year, preferring inshore marine waters. Scarce during the nesting season, retreating to tundra habitats. Arrive in late October but thin out in mid winter. Feed in deep water where they may be caught by baiting them as they dive, causing them to drown (CJ).

Scoters Melanitta sp., Black Scoter M. nigra (uncommon), Surf Scoter M. perspicillata and White-winged Scoter M. fusca (common at all seasons). None nest locally. All are large, mostly black ducks of inshore marine waters: ‘great big ones ... like a Mallard [but] black and two times longer ... we ate a lot of those ... the meat is very dark ... in blood duck stew’ (FS).

	9 lak’eech’wú, Surf Scoter Melanitta perspicillata, common in south-east Alaska and frequently observed in the vicinity of Tlingit settlements and fisheries, including at Hoonah. Scoters are associated with the migration and presence of fish, especially Pacific herring, which they follow in great flocks on a ‘silver wave’ north as various stocks spawn between March and May each spring when they can be observed ‘forever splashing’, one inter- pretation of an alternative name tlakwch’ísh (‘forever splashing’) (also interpreted as naming the Rhinoceros Auklet; see below). However, ‘forever splashing’ is probably a folk etymology (though an accurate description of the bird); the literal translation is ‘white nape (of neck)’ (J. Leer, pers comm, 2009), characteristic of the male Surf Scoter.

	10 wakkals’óox’ gáaxw, White-winged Scoter Melanitta fusca, a binomial with the general term for duck, or ‘black duck’, as the head element. The name literally means ‘slanty-eyed duck’ (J. Leer, pers comm, 2009).

	11 hinyik-gáaxu, lingit-gáaxu, goldeneyes, probably includes both the Common Bucephala clangula and Barrow’s Bucephala islandica Goldeneyes. Both are common except during summer. The name appears to incorporate a variant of gáaxw ‘duck’ as the head element, thus ‘river duck’. The Common Goldeneye nests rarely while Barrow’s nests somewhat more frequently; both use tree cavities.

	12 hintakx’was’gi, Bufflehead Bucephala albeola. Common, though nearly absent in summer. This might be the species known locally as the ‘dipper bottom’, descriptive of how they flash their white bellies when they dive (JJ).

	13 chaax or kaax, Red-breasted Merganser Mergus serrator. Common in all seasons; nests on the ground near water; otherwise partial to inshore marine waters. Preys on salmon eggs; came to be seen by some Alaskans as ‘pests’ and were often shot. Some Tlingits believe that they play a constructive role in salmon redds (nests) by culling ‘bad’ eggs which turn white (and are thus more visible to the birds), leaving the healthy more translucent eggs to hatch successfully (HK). The term has been variously translated as ‘hell-diver’ (commonly applies to grebes, Podicipedidae – see below – and to the Marbled Murrelet Brachyramphus marmoratus, Alcidae – see below) but may have contrasting meanings in different Tlingit communities.

	14 salxúts or shalxwáts, some kind of duck, perhaps the Common Merganser Mergus merganser, which is similar to the Red-breasted Merganser and common throughout the year.
	Local observers report that the down of ‘eider ducks’ was valued for quilts. The Common Eider Somateria mollisima is the only species of eider that nests in south-eastern Alaska and is the most likely source of eider down. No Tlingit term is known.

The grouse and ptarmigan (six species, of which two are common, two uncom- mon and two rare; all nest; plus the domestic turkey) are classified precisely, each term naming a category in 1:1 correspondence with a scientific species, with a single exception, the Sooty Grouse, for which male and female are separately named, suggesting the exceptional cultural significance of this family of birds. Huna Tlingit consultants report that local populations of grouse and ptarmigan are much reduced since the introduction of martens Martes americana for fur trapping. Traditionally, grouse were an important source of food, especially in autumn and spring when fish are less plentiful. Grouse also figure as important helper species in myths; for example, grouse is said to have bolstered sea lion by putting stones in his belly (grouse also have stones in their gizzards).

	15 kus’oolgé, Ruffed Grouse Bonasa umbellus, a rare resident. Males strut and ‘drum’ in spring to attract the female.

	16 ltaayí, Spruce Grouse Falcipennis canadensis. A rare resident, also known in English as ‘fool hen’, a reference to its habit of freezing stock still in the presence of danger. This grouse does not ‘hoot’, but rather rattles its wings and is found further north (JJ).

	17 x’eis’awáa, Willow Ptarmigan Lagopus lagopus. Uncommon but perma- nent resident, favouring brushy margins of muskeg and tundra (local observers refer to the three species as ‘ptarmigan’). They are most often hunted in winter when heavy snows in the mountains drive them down to the vicinity of Tlingit villages. They are readily approached close enough to kill with a club or stick or caught with a long-handled net when they dive into a snow bank. In summer they live on mountaintops. The pure white winter plumage is highly prized, the down used to decorate sea-lion masks for the Blanket Dance. Ptarmigan feet may be rubbed on a newborn’s feet so that when they grow up they will run and jump like the nimble ptarmi- gan (GO).

	18 shaayadaa x’eis’awáayi, Rock Ptarmigan Lagopus mutus. Common all year and favours more barren ground. The name is a binomial with a variant of the name for the Willow Ptarmigan as the head element, literally ‘X Willow Ptarmigan’, suggesting that the Willow Ptarmigan is thought of as the prototypical species. A third species, the White-tailed Ptarmigan Lagopus leucurus is an uncommon permanent resident, favouring more montane conditions. ‘Raven said to ptarmigan: “You will be the maker of snow-shoes. You will know how to travel in snow.” It was from these birds that Athapascans learned how to make snowshoes, and it was from them that they learned how to put their lacings on’ (Swanton, 1909).

	19 núkt and káax’, Sooty Grouse Dendragapus fuliginosus, ‘blue grouse’, male and female, respectively, indicating their cultural significance. Common all year. The name for the male imitates the ‘booming’ of the males in spring, as they perch high in a dense spruce or hemlock. ‘Raven said to grouse: “You are to live in a place where it is wintery, and you will always look out for a place high up so that you can get plenty of breeze.” Then he handed the grouse four white pebbles, telling him to swallow them so that they might become his strength [gizzard for digestion]. “You will never starve”, he said, “so long as you have these four pebbles”’ (Swanton, 1909). Grouse gizzard stones are saved, then woven into the lids of baskets or used in dance rattles. They make a distinctive clinking or ringing sound. The blue-grey feathers and spread tails of the males are favoured for decorating regalia. When the grouse start booming in mid March it is said to be a sign that it is no longer safe to dig clams (because of the ‘red tide’). As the season progresses the male grouse gradually descend, even displaying on the ground where they are easily killed with a stick. Expert hunters also call them down by imitating the clucking sounds of the females (AG). The meat is considered choice. Birds are first cleaned then roasted over an open fire. Some of the meat may be smoked and then stored in oil, to be served at potlatches throughout the year. When chicken meat was introduced to south-east Alaska, it was glossed as ‘grouse’ káax’.

	20 lugeitl’, domestic turkey Meleagris gallopavo, subfamily Meleagridinae, the only non-native species that is named. Many Tlingits prefer goose to turkey at Thanksgiving.

Loons (Divers): two common species nest locally on lakes: the Red-throated Gavia stellata and Common Loon Gavia immer. The Pacific Loon Gavia pacifica is common outside the nesting season and the Yellow-billed Loon Gavia adamsii, is an uncommon winter visitor. Local observers typically refer to ‘loons’. When loons call it is said to forecast impending rain. Some consider the loon to be a ‘spirit bird’ and, along with American Black Oystercatchers Haematopus bachmani, they sometimes appear on shamanic paraphernalia, such as rattles. When loons gathered in the autumn the Russian trading ship would come: these ships were thought to be loon spirits (AG). Not eaten, but could be hunted for their feathers.

	21 kagit, Common Loon Gavia immer. Silver Bay at Sitka, the centre of Russian America, is named for the species.

	22 yeekagáaxi, a second species of loon Gavia sp.

Grebes: the Pied-billed Podilymbus podiceps, a rare autumn and winter visitor partial to marshy lakes; the Horned Podiceps auritus, a common migrant and uncommon winter visitor; the Red-necked Podiceps grisegena, common during spring and autumn, uncommon in summer and winter, not known to nest; and the Western Aechmorphorus occidentalis, an uncommon visitor, absent in summer. The local term ‘hell-diver’ might apply to one or another (or all) grebe species, as well as referring to a species of merganser (see above) and the Marbled Murrelet (see below).
Tube-nosed swimmers: Black-footed Albatross Phoebatria nigripes is common offshore; the Northern Fulmar Fulmarus glacialis and several shear- waters Puffinus spp., of which only the Sooty Puffinus griseus is common, are rarely seen near shore. Both storm-petrels, the Fork-tailed Oceanodroma furcata and Leach’s O. leucorhoa, are common nesting species, largely absent in winter. Tlingit who have worked offshore on fishing vessels are acquainted with many of these species. PR recognizes albatross, ‘whale birds’ (i.e. Northern Fulmar), shearwaters and storm-petrels. They are ‘outside’, not found ‘in the inside waters’, and thus have no special significance for the Huna Tlingit, except perhaps as signs of distance from their coastal homelands. ‘We used to fish up and down the Gulf [of Alaska] and we’d see them [whale birds] out there.’ (KG).

	23 kichyaat, Black-footed Albatross Phoebatria nigripes, ‘long wings’. Though it dwells far offshore, it will, on occasion, come to the outer coast, sometimes following fishing boats.

	24 kichyaat yádi, Northern Fulmar Fulmarus glacialis, ‘child of albatross’. It is possible that this term is extended to include the various closely related shearwater species (but see below) that associate with albatrosses and fulmars at feeding congregations over the continental shelf.

	25 ts’agwáan, a likely term for shearwater, is associated with marine mammal haul-outs by Tlingit in rocky offshore islands. Swanton (1909) recorded the term from a Wrangell man, who identified it in a Raven myth as a bird that lives far out at sea but follows Raven around all the time and under- mines his reputation. So Raven says to the people: ‘You may listen to this TsAgwâ’n if you want to, but you will be sorry for it. He is a man from whom no good comes. Hereafter this TsAgwâ’n will live far out at sea.’

	26 ganook, storm-petrels, Oceanodroma spp., mythically associated with Hazy Islands, the last outpost of land before the open Pacific, far beyond which the Tlingit typically did not venture.

Cormorants: three species occur, though Brandt’s Phalacrocorax penicillatus is just a rare summer visitor. The Double-crested P. auritus and Pelagic Cormorant P. pelagicus both breed locally, the Pelagic more common and coastal. Also known locally as ‘Norwegian turkeys’. Their eggs were not collected because they would not cook properly; ‘they just stayed watery’ (CJ). Forecast bad weather. Halibut hooks might be attached to a carved wooden cormorant ‘buoy’ that bobbed up and down when a halibut struck.

	27 yook, Pelagic Cormorant sometimes colloquially referred to as ‘Chinese fishhooks’; well known because they inhabit nearly every rocky reef and waterway navigated. Cormorant got his gabbling call, a result of Raven tricking him into opening his mouth, ostensibly so he could place a louse on his tongue, only to rip his tongue out instead so he would not tell how Raven had deceitfully killed Bear. These birds were hunted occasionally for their meat, skin and feathers; but their meat was generally considered too fishy. The term x’adaax’aan may name a second cormorant species, most likely the Double-crested or the Pigeon Guillemot (Cepphus columba, Alcidae; see below).

Of the herons, egrets, bitterns, and their relatives, the Great Blue Heron Ardea herodias is uncommon all year round, typically nesting in colonies in tall decid- uous trees.

	28 lax’, Great Blue Heron, ‘blue heron’. The herons are ‘always around’; a few remain at river mouths all winter (AG). They are never in large groups and are not eaten. 

Diurnal raptors, including Osprey Pandion haliaetus, eagles (Bald Eagle Haliaeetus leucocephalus, Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos), hawks Accipiter spp., Buteo spp., and falcons Falco spp.. There is no record of names for the Northern Harrier, Sharp-shinned Hawk Accipiter striatus, Red-tailed Buteo jamaicensis and Rough-legged B. lagopus Hawks, American Kestrel F. sparverius or Merlin F. columbarius, though none is rare. It is possible that several of these might be included within k’ákw (see below).

	29 ats’áts’, Osprey, rarely seen around Hoonah, in contrast to Bald Eagles (KG); more common on the mainland and interior areas of Tlingit country. 

	30 ch’áak’, Bald Eagle. Immature young are distinguished as ch’ak’yéis’; gaay is an archaic variant. The Bald Eagle is the totemic figure of the Eagle moiety. Eagles are respected for their power and keen sight. Eagle feathers and claws are powerful symbols. An eagle claw attached to a ‘talking staff’ gave the speaker ‘the floor’ in councils. Wing feathers used to decorate dance costumes, but an entire eagle (or raven) wing might be employed as a broom to sweep the house. This was no sign of disrespect because it was an honourable use (CJ). KG recalls killing many eagles in his youth to earn cash from the federal government’s bounty programme, now a thing of the past. Members of Eagle clans deny killing eagles and often speak to the birds using kinship terms. Eagle clans also derive personal names from characteristics of the Bald Eagle, such as S’áaxw Shaan ‘Old Hat’, a ‘high- caste’ name or title among the Kaagwaantaan clan which references the mature Bald Eagle’s distinguished white head.

	31 kijook or gijook, Golden Eagle, usually considered quite distinct in folk ornithological systems. Golden Eagles are commonly found in Inland Tlingit country, though not around Hoonah (KG), were known to coastal groups through trade trips and travel to the interior, and are occasional visitors to the coast. De Laguna (1972) reports that the Golden Eagle, which became a totemic crest, was originally met on a mountainside above the Ahrnklin River (near Yakutat), and had come from the other (interior) side of the Saint Elias Range to hunt for ‘groundhogs’ (most likely Arctic Ground Squirrel Spermophilus parryii).

Tlingit observers normally speak of Northern Goshawks, Red-tailed Hawks, Peregrine Falcons, and perhaps smaller species such as the Sharp-shinned Hawk and American Kestrel by their English vernacular names. Hawks may be represented in carvings as a face with a hooked beak.

	32 k’ákw, Northern Goshawk Accipiter gentilis, captures the calls of a goshawk defending its nest. Some say the term refers to a large owl, either the Great Grey Owl Strix nebulosa or the Snowy Owl Bubo scandiacus, though the onomatopoeic name suggests otherwise. All hawks, grey and black, as well as other kinds, were called by this term (de Laguna, 1972). Thus, it probably would include at least Sharp-shinned, Red-tailed and Rough-legged Hawks, and the Northern Harrier, if not also the American Kestrel. This bird is said to have procured fire while, in another story, a ‘mountain hawk’ (shaa k’ákw) serves as Raven’s foil and gets thrown down a mountain in a box (Swanton, 1909).

	33 shaayáal, Peregrine Falcon Falco peregrinus, is smaller than the Red-tail: ‘It’s a pretty popular hawk... It lives in the cliffs. That way it could see the area that it was going to hunt: shaaya, means “the face of the mountain” where it typically nests and circles’ (GO).

Sandhill Crane (Grus canadensis) (Order Gruiformes, Family Gruidae).

	34 dool, Sandhill Crane Grus canadensis,is well known to local observers and is considered a harbinger of spring, with large, noisy flocks passing overhead in late April or early May. This is a signal for people to get out of the house. Migrating cranes rarely stop near Hoonah and other Tlingit bays and estuaries because they favour extensive flats, although they may stop to wait out a storm. Some state, based on Tlingit legend, that hummingbirds migrate northward in spring with the cranes, hitching a ride on their backs.

Shorebirds, including plovers Charadrius spp., the Black Oystercatcher Haematopus bachmani and a large number of sandpipers, snipe and their relatives: 11 species breed locally (8 common, 3 uncommon); 21 species are regular migrants (7 common, seven uncommon and seven rare); 7 species winter (1 common, 3 uncommon and 3 rare). Shorebirds are often named indiscriminately as ‘snipe’, or ‘sand snipe’, for sandpipers. A general term might be at’akéenyu.aa (literally: ‘birds that live along the shore’) or daak’u or t’aak’u, alluding to their mass movement, ‘flooding up’ over a tide flat (JA).

	35 sedaadak’éedaa, perhaps the Semipalmated Plover Charadrius semipalmatus, a common nesting species.

	36 lugán, Black Oystercatcher, is an important clan crest ‘totem.’ Huna Tlingit people harvested oystercatcher eggs and steamed them in seaweed over a driftwood fire. The flesh was also eaten, though considered to taste ‘fishy’.

	37 x’at’daayéejayi, possibly Black Turnstone Arenaria melanocephala, common on migration, uncommon in winter.

	38 hinxukadzéedzi, a small sandpiper, perhaps the Western Sandpiper Calidris mauri or Dunlin Calidris alpina, though the similar and equally common Least Sandpiper Calidris minutilla has the advantage of nesting locally (but see below). CJ reports that when he was a boy they would hunt them with shotguns in the huge migrating flocks on the tide flats. His mother ‘used to make stew out of a whole bunch of them’.

	39 gus’yadóoli, perhaps Least Sandpiper Calidris minutilla, a common migrant and uncommon breeder, nesting in wet grassy habitats. Raven said to this sandpiper: ‘You will be seen only when the warm weather is coming on. Never come near except when warm weather is coming’ (Swanton, 1909).

	40 ayaheeyáa, ‘whimbrel’, ‘curlew’ or ‘sandpiper’. No curlew is of regular occurrence, unless the uncommon migratory Whimbrel Numenius phaeo- pus might be intended.

	41 séitaa,perhapsLesserYellowlegsTringaflavipes.

	42 séitaa tlein, a species related to séitaa but larger, perhaps the Greater Yellowlegs Tringa melanoleuca. The binomial name suggests two similar or closely related species.

	43 éek lukakées’i, ‘snipe’ or ‘sandpiper’, perhaps a dowitcher Limnodromus sp.

	44 lu.áadaa, Common Snipe Gallinago gallinago, common spring, summer and autumn, and uncommon through the winter. CJ recalls that ‘We ate a lot of snipe. My dad used to shoot them with a shotgun.’ However, by ‘snipe’ CJ is referring to shorebirds in general.

	45 ch’eet, perhaps Red-necked Phalarope Phalaropus lobatus, a common migrant, though glossed alternatively as a ‘murrelet’, a very different species, although both might be encountered in large flocks on inshore marine waters.

Gulls, terns and jaegers (skuas): ten species of gull (five common, one uncom- mon and four rare); two species of terns (one common, one very rare and local) occur regularly; three species of jaegers occur regularly (two uncommon, one rare). Only the Parasitic Jaeger (Stercorarius parasiticus) nests in the region and is regularly observed near shore.

	46 kéidladi, Glaucous-winged Gull Larus glaucescens. The Huna Tlingit harvested eggs (k’wát’) from a large colony on the Marble Islands in what became Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve. The eggs were widely shared in the community and their harvest provided an opportunity for the family to share the experience of gathering a valued food. The community sanctioned a conservative harvest strategy, harvesting eggs from incom- plete clutches (Hunn et al, 2003). The closely related Herring Gull Larus argentatus smithsonianus breeds sparingly, and occasionally interbreeds, in local Glaucous-winged Gull colonies. Tlingit people apparently do not recognize this distinction. A large nestling of this species is called kéidladi yadi. Mottled brownish immature young are called kéidladiyéis’ or kéidladik’í. A general term for immature gulls is lawúxh, though it is not clear how this term differs in application from the previous terms.

	47 k’eikw’w, Black-legged Kittiwake Rissa tridactyla, a cliff-nesting gull and an important clan symbol or ‘totem’. The Tlingit distinctions for ‘seagull’, ‘kittiwake’ (or ‘kittiwick’) and ‘tern’ are clear (Thornton, 2008). The clan totem and the species that the ‘Seagull Girls’ of the T’akdeintaan clan imitate in their dance is the Black-legged Kittiwake. The bird is described as a smaller version or relative of the ‘seagull’, a colonial cliff-nesting species that when disturbed forms swirling masses of birds overhead which call ‘gack, gack, gack, gack’. Large colonies are reported for Lituya Bay, origin point for the T’akdeintaan clan which takes this bird as its symbolic avatar.

	48 kootl’éet’aa or kool’éit’áa, probably the Arctic Tern Sterna paradisaea, a common nesting species on sandy beaches in Glacier Bay. Might include the rare Aleutian Tern Sterna aleutica at Yakutat Bay. These are the only terns to be expected in the region. It may also refer to the Mew Gull Larus canus, common all year round, which nests in trees. Bonaparte’s Gull Chroicocephalus philadelphia, another locally common, small tree-nesting species might be included or perhaps be the primary referent.

	49 lawúx jaeger Stercorarius spp.

Alcids, including murres Uria, two species; the Pigeon Guillemot Cepphus columba; murrelets Brachyramphus, two species; Synthliboramphus antiquus; auklets Ptychoramphus aleuticus, Cyclorrhynchus psittacula, Cerorhinca monocerata; and puffins Fratercula, two species.

	50 keel, Common Murre Uria algae.

	51 x’adaax’aan, Pigeon Guillemot Cepphus columba; but this term has also been interpreted as naming a species of cormorant (Phalacrocorax sp.; see above).

	52 cháax or káax, ‘spirits are crying’,is a totemic crest animal. Local accounts of vocalizations and behaviour of this bird suggest that it refers to the Marbled Murrelet Brachyramphus marmoratus. Called ‘hell-diver’ or ‘auklet’ locally has led some to gloss the Tlingit term as ‘grebe’ or ‘merganser’. Local observers provide rich, if ambiguous, descriptions of this bird. It is said to fly high overhead calling ‘tee, tee, tee, tee’, which in sunny weather means that rain will come soon (AG); so get your fish in off the drying racks! They are said to nest in trees, to sleep ‘up on the mountainside’ rather than in the water (CJ). They feed on the ‘outer rim of the bay’, sometimes at night, their diving leaving a phosphorescent trail of phytoplankton. In the daytime, they leave a trail of bubbles. These various characteristic behaviours are the basis for several Tlingit personal names – for example, X’ayasún or Kik-sún (‘it’s bubbling’), Éedaa- kutxayanaháx (‘phosphorescent stars’) and Shaayataa (‘sleeps on the mountainside’). It is said to ‘bounce along’, an apt description of murrelets or small auklets taking off with a full crop (CJ, SH). SH’s Wooshkeetaan clan name, Stuwoo.ilgé (‘he thought he was big’), is also derived from a story about this bird: Murelet went out to the Gulf of Alaska to feed, and when it came time to return to the inside waters near Hoonah, it was a clear night with a full moon. Murrelet flew up so high that the shadow he cast with his wings seem to cover the entire earth, so ‘he thought he was big’ (W. Howell, pers comm, 2009). It is also likely that this Tlingit term is generalized to include, in addition to the iconic endangered Marbled Murrelet, the Kittlitz’s Murrelet Brachyramphus brevirostris, Ancient Murrelet Synthliboramphus antiquus and Cassin’s Auklet Ptychoramphus aleuticus.

	53 tlakwch’ísh or lakwch’ísh, Rhinoceros Auklet Cerorhinca monocerata, often interpreted as ‘forever splashing’. An alternative interpretation is that this term is a synonym for the Surf Scoter (see above).

	54 lugwáach’/lugwát, Horned Puffin Fratercula corniculata or, possibly, Rhinocerous Auklet.

	55 xík, Tufted Puffin Fratercula cirrhata, is the more common of the two puffin species, although local observers know both, commonly ‘puffin’. They were hunted at their outer coastal colonies for their plumage as well as for their colourful beaks, incorporated within dance rattles. The eggs, and occasionally the meat, might be eaten.

Of the pigeons and doves, the exotic Rock Pigeon Columba livia is now established in urban centres. The larger native Band-tailed Pigeon Patagioenas fasciatus is rare, nesting but leaving in winter. The Mourning Dove Zenaida macroura is a rare straggler.

	56 gus’yá kindachooneidí, perhaps Rock Dove, though more likely derived from a term for the native Band-tailed Pigeon, but literally glossed as ‘horizon mallard’. ‘When “doves” arrive in spring it is a sign to halt the clam harvest for fear of red-tide poisoning’ (GO). ‘Dove’ here might refer to the Band-tailed Pigeon or the Mourning Dove or both. 

Owls and the Common Nighthawk: ten species of owls occur with some regularity (one common, one uncommon and eight rare), seven of these nest; the Common Nighthawk is a rare autumn visitor. De Laguna (1972) notes that linguists Naish and Story call the ‘owl with ear tufts’ tsísk’w or dzísk’w (Great Horned Owl); the owl ‘without ear tufts’ k’úkw (Great Grey or Snowy Owls); and a ‘small owl’ tlénx’ shx’uneit (perhaps includes several smaller species). This suggests that only three contrasting folk generic owl taxa are regularly named, despite the proliferation of terms listed below.

	57 tsísk’w or dzísk’w, owls in general; prototypically the Great Horned Owl Bubo virginianus, an uncommon resident. Owls are imagined to be like ‘wise old men’, and thought of as a ‘spirit’, and a ‘shaman’s bird’ (AG). Their appearance near a home may presage a death in the family. The bird itself is not bad, just a messenger. Any owl might be a ‘messenger’, some bringing good luck, a ‘future’, acquired by killing the bird and using the skin or feathers in one’s dancing regalia. The owl is a lineal crest and figures prominently in myth, usually as a messenger. In Sitka, a woman who was a greedy harvester of herring and stingy towards her mother-in- law was transformed into an owl that still calls occasionally, in Tlingit, from ‘Owl Slide’ above town.

	58 kéigán, Snowy Owl Bubo scandiacus, rare winter visitor, though common
	in invasion years. Most local observers can recall having seen few of these owls during their lifetimes. Their rarity and unpredictable appearances may contribute to their reputation as a bird of ill omen. If one should land on your house, it means a death in the family.

	59 k’ishagwát, perhaps Northern Pygmy-Owl Glaucidium gnoma, a tiny forest owl, rare in south-eastern Alaska.

	60 k’úkw or oondách, Great Grey Owl Strix nebulosa. The term k’úkw may also be glossed ‘Snowy Owl’ (Boas, 1891). Oondách is a ‘Tlingitization’ of the phrase ‘Old Dutch’ (J. Leer, pers comm, 2009), a gloss for ‘boogieman’, and may refer to a range of owls beyond the Great Grey. The term k’ákw is sometimes glossed ‘Great Grey Owl’ or even ‘Snowy Owl’, though it more likely refers to the Northern Goshawk (see above).

	61 tlénx’ shx’aneit or xéex, perhaps Saw-whet Aegolius acadicus or Boreal Owl Aegolius funereus. The Saw-whet nests; the Boreal is a rare winter visitor. A small owl with ‘tiny ear tufts’ known locally as the ‘screech owl’, because it screeches, might be the Northern Saw-whet Owl – which ‘screeches’ (compare xéex) but does not have ear tufts – or the Western Screech-Owl Megascops kennicottii, which has ear tufts. This ‘screech owl’ might also be the Short-eared Owl Asio flammeus, which exhibits both defining characteristics and which is the most common and conspicuous local owl, though not small.

	62 gutguníksh and jinakaxwájaa, said to name two species of owls. If they are not synonyms for any previously named they might refer to the Western Screech-Owl or the Short-eared Owl. The former is a rare forest resident. The latter is a common spring and autumn migrant, rare at other seasons, but conspicuous as it often hunts in late afternoon over coastal marshes. Other candidates include the Northern Hawk-Owl Surnia ulula, a rare migrant and winter visitor that has nested, and the Barred Owl Strix varia, a recent immigrant, having spread west of the Rockies only since the 1960s.

	63 yaanashgeigí, Common Nighthawk Chordeiles minor, a rare autumn straggler, or perhaps the Short-eared Owl, which hunts in a somewhat similar fashion.

Swifts, hummingbirds and the Belted Kingfisher. Two species of hummingbirds might be seen, the common Rufous Selasphorus rufus and the rare Anna’s Calypte anna, a recent immigrant from California. The Belted Kingfisher is unique.

	64 dagitgiyáa or digitgiyáa and tlakwsh’exdakín, Rufous Hummingbird Selasphorus rufus or, most likely, any hummingbird species. The first two names mean something like ‘flies staying still’ or ‘hovers’. Raven said: ‘A person will enjoy seeing you. If he sees you once, he will want to see you again’ (Swanton, 1909). ‘The hummingbird is a spirit... It’s just like God comes down with a spirit for you’ (CJ).

	65 tlaxaneis’,BeltedKingfisherCerylealcyon,acommonyear-roundresident, fishing along every shoreline. The name is onomatopoeic. The Belted Kingfisher is a clan totem crest whose behaviour is also said to ‘foretell the acquisition of wealth’ (de Laguna, 1972).

Woodpeckers: six species occur regularly (one common, four uncommon, one rare). The Red-breasted Sapsucker Sphyrapicus ruber is common, but rare in winter; Downy Picoides pubescens, Hairy P. villosus and American Three-toed Woodpeckers P. tridactylus are all uncommon permanent residents. The Northern Flicker Colaptes auratus is uncommon, absent in winter. The Black- backed Woodpecker Picoides arcticus is a rare spring and autumn visitor.

	66 gandaadagóogu or gandaagóogu or gandgóogu describe the species’ hallmark behaviour: ‘striking the wood’ or ‘picking around the deadwood’. They may refer, prototypically to the Red-breasted Sapsucker, a common resident, but perhaps refer to all woodpeckers, the flicker excepted (see below).

	67 kóon, Northern Flicker Colaptes auratus, an unusual woodpecker, often feeding on the ground. Shows striking red-shafted wing and tail feathers, which Tlingits value (de Laguna, 1972). Raven said to Flicker: ‘You will be head among the birds [small] in size. You will not be found in all places. You will be very seldom seen’ (Swanton, 1909). Elsewhere in Tlingit mythology the bird is associated with the wife of the Controller of the Flood (Swanton, 1909). Several Eagle clans have houses named for this bird and use it as a crest. 

Corvids, including jays (two species), the Black-billed Magpie Pica hudsonica, Northwestern Crow Corvus caurinus and the Common Raven Corvus corax: all are common permanent residents. The Gray Jay Perisoreus canadensis is rare in autumn and winter. All are named.

	68 kooyéix or taatl’eeshdéi, Gray Jay Perisoreus canadensis, ‘camp robber’. AG states that they are not found at Hoonah, only the ‘blue jay’. The term ‘camp robber’ might be applied locally to the Black-billed Magpie.

	69 x’éishx’w, Steller’s Jay Cyanocitta stelleri, ‘blue jay’. The name is onomatopoeic. Steller’s Jays are permanent residents, but often stay back in the forest in spring and summer and are only conspicuous about town and along beaches in autumn and winter. The appearance of Steller’s Jays about town indicated the end of summer (last of August to middle of September). This also indicates that it is now again safe to harvest clams. Local observers are of two minds about jays. For some they are an ‘evil spirit bird’, a garden pest and a nuisance for hunters. On the other hand, they may warn people that bears are nearby. Tlingits appreciate their intelli- gence and fine colours. Raven said to Blue Jay: ‘You will have very fine clothes and be a good talker. People will take patterns [probably ‘colours’] from your clothes’ (Swanton, 1909).

	70 ts’eigeenéi, Black-billed Magpie, announces that winter is just around the corner. They come down from the mountains just before the first snowfall. When the magpies arrive you ‘better have your larder full for winter’ (AG). A totemic animal of the T’akdeintaan clan, Magpies are judged to be ‘good birds’, ‘friendly’, not messengers, just mimics. They are also given to thiev- ery, attracted to bright objects as well as food.

	71 ts’axweil, Northwestern Crow. Common all year along the beaches; but Tlingit people have little to say about crows, pro or con, at least in compar- ison with the Raven. AG denies that crows and ravens are ‘related’. Raven does not treat crows as close relatives but says to them: ‘You will make lots of noise. You will be great talkers’ (Swanton, 1909). Thus, when you hear one, you often hear many. Neither crow nor raven eggs were eaten; they were too gamey (CJ).

	72 yéil, Common Raven. Members of Raven clans may feel a particular loyalty to the Raven and likewise for those of Eagle clans because Raven, as the great Transformer, is known to all. Raven is ‘a very spiritual bird’ (CJ). Throughout the northern north-west coast of North America, Raven is credited with releasing the sun, moon and stars from their guardian, in the Tlingit case a figure known as the ‘Nobleman at the Head of the Nass River’ (in present-day British Columbia) and releasing them into the world, making the cosmos possible. Similarly, Raven’s mischievous thieving allowed fresh water to be released to the world. However, in stealing water from the mythic adversary (usually conceptualized as ganook, the storm- petrel) who guarded its spring-fed source on a rocky island off south-east Alaska, Raven was temporarily caught and permanently blackened in the smoke hole through which he made his escape (CJ). Nevertheless, he endured in his purloining mission and proceeded to distribute fresh water across the land, laying down the myriad rivers and streams (literally driblets from his mouth) that now define the Pacific north-west coast. In another episode, Raven also outwits cormorant, tearing out his tongue and depriving him of speech. For this reason, to this day cormorant says only ‘wulewulewule’ (Boas, 1916). Although this trickster-demiurge carries the same name as the common Raven, he is a singular mythic being. Common Raven, the bird, is similarly clever and foolish, and also of assistance. Fisherman lost offshore in a fog count on ravens to lead them to shore because they know ravens can’t land on water and must return to land. Though a raven wing might be used as a broom to sweep out the house, KG (a member of a Raven clan) states that ‘You never ate them [Raven or Eagle]. They weren’t put on there for subsistence. They were put there ... to show us our way.’ He recalled that when his sister Janet died, ‘There were ravens flying over the house, and it gave the rest of the family a real good feeling because that’s Janet, you know.’

Swallows: six species occur (two common, two uncommon, two rare: all nesting and all leave for the winter).

	73 séewkooshdaneit, ‘frequent rain’. The arrival of swallows in spring indicates that ‘frost is over with’. The name is perhaps a reference to how they may blanket the sky in transit or pursuit of insect prey.

Larks: Horned Lark Eremophila alpestris, the only species, is an uncommon migrant of open areas, a rare alpine breeder, absent in winter.

	74 x’aakats’ítsgu, Horned Lark.

Chickadees (two species) and wrens are permanent fixtures of deep forests, typically hunting bugs on bark and foliage, often flocking together after the nesting season.

	75 kaatoowú, Chestnut-backed Chickadee Poecile rufescens, probably includes the Black-capped Chickadee P. atricapillus. Tlingit believe that chickadees announce visitors: ‘When you hear them, better start cleaning your house; you’re going to have company’ (HS). Similar associations are recognized by the Dena’ina Athabaskans (Russell and West, 2003) and the Sahaptins of the Columbia River Plateau (Hunn, 1990).

	76 woolnáx wooshkaak, Winter Wren Troglodytes troglodytes, announce as they sing in the evening: ‘It’s time to go to bed now’ (HS). The name means, literally, ‘goes through a hole’ (Swanton, 1909; HK).

The American Dipper is common year round.

	77 hinyikl’eixí, American Dipper Cinclus mexicanus, suggests its favoured habitat, inside rivers (hinyík). It is a ‘spirit bird’, a ‘shaman spirit’, a ‘spirit watcher’ or ‘woods doctor’ (CJ). It has a similar reputation among Columbia River Plateau Sahaptins (Hunn et al, 1990).

Thrushes include the Mountain Bluebird Sialia currucoides and Townsend’s Solitaire Myadestes townsendi, both rare migrants, though the solitaire is known to breed; three spot-breasted thrushes Catharus spp., common or uncommon summer residents; the American Robin Turdus migratorius and Varied Thrush Ixoreus naevius, both common spring to autumn, rare in winter.

	78 ts’ats’ée tlein, ‘big songbird’, probably includes the three spot-breasted thrushes, the Gray-cheeked Thrush C. minimus, Swainson’s Thrush C. ustulatus and Hermit Thrush C. guttatus.

	79 shoox’, American Robin, signals spring when they begin to sing and autumn when they disappear. Huna people did eat robin’s eggs (CJ). Raven said to Robin: ‘You will make the people happy by letting them hear your whistle. You will be a good whistler’ (Swanton, 1909). De Laguna (1972) recorded the belief in Yakutat, common among Native American tribes, that Robin scorched his front in ancient times and this is the source of its distinguishing red breast.

	80 sh’ux’.uwa’, probably the Varied Thrush.

Waxwings (Bombycilla, two species) have become much more common in recent years, evidence of a warming climate, eating crab-apple blossoms in spring (AG); but there is no record of a Tlingit name for them. Wood warblers: 11 species occur regularly, 10 nest, though none spends the winter.

	81 asx’aansháach’i, a ‘yellow warbler’. Raven said to this ‘small bird with greenish-yellow plumage’, a common summer visitor to coastal south-east Alaska, ‘You will always go in flocks. You will always be on the tops of the trees. That is where your food is’ (Swanton, 1909). jimasasée is an interior Tlingit synonym and most likely refers to any of four common, arboreal, predominantly yellow species of wood warblers: Orange-crowned Vermivora celata, Yellow Dendroica petechia, Townsend’s Dendroica townsendi and Wilson’s Wilsonia pusilla.

The Western Tanager is uncommon between spring and autumn. Sparrows (Spizella, Passerculus, Passerella, Melospiza and Zonotrichia, nine species. in all), Dark-eyed Junco Junco hyemalis, Lapland Longspur Calcarius lapponicus and the Snow Bunting Plectrophenax nivalis often feed on the ground, nesting on the ground or in low bushes or trees.

	82 tlagoo ts’ats’éeyee, possibly White-crowned Sparrow Z. leucophrys, but this is suspect given that the White-crowned Sparrow does not nest and is common only as a spring migrant. Other sparrows might seem to be more conspicuous – the Song Sparrow Melospiza melodia, for example, which is common year round, the only common species in winter. Certain thrushes are called ts’ats’ée tlein ‘big ts’ats’ée’, ‘big songbird’. ts’ítskw or ts’ats’ée or ts’agéegi are all glosses for ‘songbird’ (J. Leer, pers comm, 2009), though ts’agéegi may name a specific kind of bird.

	83 t’áat’,Dark-eyedJunco,iscommoninmuskeg,beachfringeandestuary.

The Pine Grosbeak Pinicola enucleator and the Pine Siskin Carduelis pinus.

	84 Xunkáa, xunkahaa or xóon keidlí, Pine Grosbeak, ‘Northwind Bird’. Raven went to this bird and said: ‘You will never be seen unless the north wind is going to blow’ (Swanton, 1909).

	85 s’áas’, Pine Siskin. Swanton (1909) recorded that ‘Raven came to the “wild canary” (s!a ̄ s!), which is found in the Tlingit country all the year round, and said: “You will be had among the very small birds. You are not to live on what human beings eat. Keep away from them.”’ And so it is rarely seen.

Unidentified birds:
	86 chée
	87 ch’éeni kwlayáat’ 
	88 s’awan
	Three different species of birds. ch’éeni kwlayáat’ is ‘long-ribbon’, probably referring to a duck with long neck feathers that are similar to ribbons.