(extracted from http://faculty.washington.edu/hunn/zapotec/z3.html)
2: San Juan Gbëë ethnobiological classification in light of Berlin´s universal principles.
1. Introduction
2. Does biological distinctiveness account for the selective recognition of folk taxa?
3. Nomenclature: primary versus secondary names
4. Taxonomies
5. Life forms and other suprageneric taxa
6. Where do fungi fit? The fungal domain in Gbëë Zapotec
7. Subspecific taxa
8. Conclusions

1. Introduction
One reason for my journey to San Juan Gbëë was my interest in testing current ethnobiological theories with regard to the universal and varying features of ethnobiological classification systems. I hoped a new study of a poorly documented and quite distinct language might suggest refinements of our current theoretical models. This might seem an assignment of interest to but a small coterie of academic specialists. However, I believe that is a misconception, as the broad question of how humans make sense of the biodiversity that sustains our lives is at the heart of attempts to understanding the human mind (which can outperform the most powerful computer at pattern recognition and judicious discrimination), human language (our most effective tool for thinking about and thus adapting to the world), human culture (how we have learned to live everywhere on earth), the trajectory of human history (marked by the progressive expansion of the human ecological “footprint”), and human-environment relationships (on which our continued survival depends). Perhaps all scholars imagine that their work is of the deepest significance. In any case, I hope to make a strong case for the universal significance of this one Zapotec village tucked away in the folds of the Sierra Sur of Oaxaca, Mexico.

The dominant theoretical framework today for analyzing ethnobiological classification is Brent Berlin´s perceptual/taxonomic model, first detailed in his 1973 American Anthropologist article, “General principles of classification and nomenclature in folk biology,” co-authored with Dennis Breedlove — foremost expert on the flora of Chiapas, Mexico — and Peter Raven — director of the famed Missouri Botanical Garden (Berlin, Breedlove, and Raven 1973). His work built upon that of Harold Conklin, whose 1954 Yale dissertation, “The relation of Hanunóo culture to the plant world,” set a standard still rarely matched for meticulous documentation and intelligent analysis of a system of ethnobotanical knowledge. Conklin´s work and Ralph Bulmer´s contemporaneous researches on ethnozoology in Papua New Guinea provided the “shock of recognition” that inspired Berlin to recognize universal patterns beneath the confusing abundance of detail in these ethnobiological case studies.

I had the good fortune to stumble into Berlin´s ethnobiology seminar at the University of California, Berkeley, during a formative stage in the development of Berlin´s theoretical ideas. I was a green graduate student, but already an avid birder and amateur student of natural history, so I found the material fascinating and personally meaningful. Berlin subsequently invited me to accompany him on a brief exploratory trip to Peru in 1970. As I recall we argued nearly non-stop for three-weeks about the nature of folk biological understanding, with local Indians there to reign in our more ambitious generalizations with real-time commentary on the forest around us. Twenty years and several dog-fights later, and with the benefit of hindsight and a substantial number of state of the art ethnobiological ethnographies, many inspired by Berlin´s “general principles,” Berlin took stock of the enterprise in Ethnobiological Classification (1992), which stands as the current standard for the field.

Like all “triumphant syntheses,” Berlin´s has drawn fire, serving as a lightning rod for both scholarly reformists and revolutionaries. Revolutionaries, such as Roy Ellen (1986), may question the value of the enterprise itself, refusing to accept the premise of comparability, arguing instead for a radical relativism of “invented natures” as historically specific creative products of the human cultural imagination that should not be reduced to the twigs and branches of a taxonomic tree. I´m no revolutionary here, but squarely in the reformist camp. I am firmly convinced that I could in short order master a sufficient vocabulary in any human language to carry on a lively discussion about the wonders of the local avifauna or the medicinal values of the local flora with a native. While the assertion that “we all live in the same world with just the labels switched” (to paraphrase Sapir´s characterization of the na…ve realist point of view) is a bit exaggerated, I believe it comes close to the truth with respect to flora and fauna, despite Sapir´s emphatic rejection of the idea (“The worlds in which different societies live are distinct worlds, not merely the same world with different labels attached” [Sapir 1956:162]). However, I am not yet satisfied that Berlin´s current theoretical framework should stand as is, as I am acutely aware of a number of anomalous facts that are but poorly accommodated within the current theory.

2. Does biological distinctiveness account for the selective recognition of folk taxa?
The local Zapotec system recognizes 717 terminal plant taxa included within 452 folk generic taxa. Yet there are at least 1075 types of plants (monotypic species plus varieties of polytypic species) recorded for the local flora by professional botanists, and likely several hundreds more that have yet to be documented. These Zapotec taxa correspond in the great majority of cases to a category or to a small set of closely related categories named by professional botanists. Our task is to explain in what manner the two systems fail to correspond, whether at the most precise classificatory level of each system, that is, scientific species and varieties versus Zapotec terminal taxa, or at the most basic level, that is, scientific species versus Zapotec generics. Several measures of the correspondence of folk to scientific biological taxonomies have been proposed (e.g., Berlin, Breedlove, and Raven 1974; Hunn 1975b). I will employ here what I have called the Scientific Species Recognition Ratio or SSRR (Hunn 1999a).

It is undeniable that the people of San Juan have developed a “system of ethnobiological classification” that is less than exhaustive in recognizing the local biodiversity characterized by modern science. To determine what factors might guide the selective attention by local folk botanists to this ambient biodiversity, I will examine which types of plants are least precisely classified in the folk system. For example, one component of San Juan plant diversity treated with little attention to detail are the ferns, of which there are eight families, 20 genera, and 57 species in our records classified into just nine folk generics. In particular, the single folk genus guìzh-crùz `cross plant´ encompasses at least 24 fern species of 12 genera in six families. Are these ferns less “biologically distinctive” than a similar range of plant species treated in more detail? Compare the 13 species of oak, which represent a single genus (Quercus) of a single family (Fagaceae), but which are classified into five folk generics and some ten terminal folk taxa (see Table 4.5). In this case the most important factors would seem to be not biological distinctiveness but size and cultural salience or “utility,” broadly defined.

A close examination of the San Juan ethnobotanical system indicates that biological distinctiveness (to be operationalized below) is a key factor in shaping the final outcome, but that factors independent of biological distinctiveness also play major roles, in particular, cultural significance or “utility.” One measure of the biological distinctiveness of a taxon is the degree or level of taxonomic contrast in the Linnaean system between that taxon and its closest relatives, since the Linnaean system is intended to reflect judgments as to relative evolutionary divergence of taxa through time. Thus, two species of a single genus are less biologically distinct one from the other than two species of different genera, though they be of the same family. Two species of different genera and families should be judged still more distinct biologically. Thus we should expect that congeneric species will be distinguished with less finesse in the folk system than the average species.

We may test this assertion at both folk generic and terminal folk taxonomic levels. Given that the 1075 terminal scientific plant taxa (1065 species plus a few varietal distinctions) are grouped by San Juaneros in 452 folk genera and 717 terminal folk taxa, we may calculate the average Scientific Species Recognition Ratio, or more simply, the “recognition ratio,” for San Juan plants at the folk generic level as 0.42 (452/1065) and at the level of terminal folk taxa as 0.67 (717/1075).

Let us compare these overall recognition ratios with those for the 73 highly polytypic Linnaean genera [in six cases I have combined two closely allied scientific genera that are treated more or less equivalently in the folk system, e.g., Cosmos and Dahlia], that is, scientific genera that are represented locally by four or more species. These 73 exceptionally polytypic genera include a total of 427 of the terminal scientific taxa recorded for the community, viz., 14% of local Linnaean genera but 40% of local Linnaean species and varieties. These 427 species are subsumed by 119 Zapotec terminal taxa (and assigned to the extended ranges of 33 additional folk taxa that have prototypes elsewhere). The average recognition ratio for these congeneric taxa is 0.28, substantially less than the overall ratio of 0.42. Thus, the relatively low biological distinctiveness of congeneric taxa is reflected in lower recognition ratios, as Berlin predicts.

However, comparing overall taxonomic correspondence masks significant variation within the categories compared. By no means do all congeneric taxa exhibit this “lumping” tendency. Notable exceptions include: Chenopodium in which four local species are each named by separate Zapotec generic terms. The recognition ratio for Chenopodium is thus a perfect 1.0. The four local Acacia species are classified in three Zapotec generics for a recognition ratio of 0.75. These acacias are further distinguished at the Zapotec specific rank, so that the recognition ratio at the terminal taxonomic level is again a perfect 1.0. Each of the eight introduced Citrus species is clearly recognized in San Juan Zapotec, grouped in six Zapotec generics and in eight terminal categories. The generic recognition ratio is thus 0.75, the specific again 1.0. The native genus Agave, represented locally by nine species, is placed in eight Zapotec generics (recognition ratio = 0.89). All are included within the small Zapotec life form dòb, along with several superficially similar species of the Agavaceae, Aloaceae, and Bromeliaceae. The genus Solanum, with 13 local species, is sorted into no less than seven Zapotec generics, with some of these further differentiated at the specific rank. The generic recognition ratio for Solanum is thus 0.54, the specific ratio 0.68.

These five polytypic scientific genera run against the current. In each of these cases the exceptional cultural utility of the included species would seem to account for the finesse by which they are classified in Zapotec. In sharp contrast to these finely differentiated genera are five folk generics that correspond to no fewer than 90 scientific species and varieties of 51 genera and 17 families. The average recognition ratio for these broadly inclusive folk generics is 0.06, far below the average of 0.42. As previously noted, half of all local fern species and varieties (of the division Pteridophyta) — 24 species of 12 genera in 6 families — are called guìzh-crùz `cross plant´. Excluded are representatives of two “fern allies,” the horsetails (Equisetaceae) and the club-mosses (Selaginellaceae), plus several “true ferns” singled out as “fright medicines” or for some particularly distinctive morphological feature. There is ample biological distinctiveness among these “cross-plant” ferns (and many of these species are quite common and conspicuous near the village), yet they are classified summarily in Zapotec. Why? I suspect it has to do with the limited culturally recognized utility of most ferns. Aside from the medicinal value of those classified as ncuàan-dzéb `fright medicine´, ferns are appreciated for their ornamental value, but this is a value quite general to most if not all guìzh-crùz without distinction.

We may note a similar disinterest in the fine classificatory details for two additional Zapotec generics, guièe-dzǐn̲g `hummingbird flower´ and guìzh-dǐp `grass/rush/sedge´. Each encompasses some two dozen species and varieties distributed across several distinct plant families. guièe-dzǐn̲g names plants with showy, mostly red tubular flowers attractive to hummingbirds. However, this co-evolutionary adaptation of bird as pollinator and flower as nectar source has cropped up independently in various plant families via parallel evolution.

Notably, if one or more species of these broad categories are recognized for an outstanding peculiarity, they will be named for that characteristic and thus set apart from the more heterogeneous generic in which they would otherwise be placed. For example, Penstemon campanulatus, one of the more prominent hummingbird flowers, is sometimes named guièe-měets `louse/nit flower´, an allusion to the resemblance of the tiny yellow anthers prominently exerted from the penstemon´s red corollas to the eggs of lice. However, those who are ignorant of the term guièe-měets do not hesitate to call Penstemon campanulatus guièe-dzǐn̲g. Likewise, a species of Indian paint-brush common near San Juan town (Castilleja arvensis) may be distinguished as guièe-x-côl-mæ̀cw-zhǐil `sheep´s-tail flower´ (sheep are known as mæ̀cw-zhǐil, literally `cotton dogs´), though all other Castilleja species are considered guièe-dzǐn̲g, as is Castilleja arvensis by those ignorant of this nomenclatural alternative.

guièe-dzîl `orchid flower´ and guièe-ló-yâg `flower on a tree´ are somewhat less inclusive than the previous three cases, encompassing 12 and nine species respectively, each confined to the several genera (eight and five respectively) of a single plant family, orchids in the first instance, mistletoes in the second. Generic level recognition ratios in these cases are 0.08 and 0.11, well below the overall average. Nevertheless, in both cases there is a close, though imperfect correspondence between the Zapotec category and a modern scientific family.

Of these five cases, three are also poorly differentiated internally. Three weakly distinguished specific subtypes are noted for each. By contrast, guìzh-dǐp and guièe-dzîl are finely differentiated at the subgeneric level, with 11 subcategories of orchids named, for a terminal level recognition ratio of 0.92, and 14 of grasses, rushes, and sedges, for a terminal level recognition ratio of 0.67.

Finally, it should be noted that only guièe-dzǐn̲g constitutes a distinctly aberrant category vis-à-vis the perspective of contemporary evolutionary systematics, particularly if we interpret these broadly inclusive folk generics as “background” categories that span entire families, e.g., the Orchidaceae and the Loranthaceae, or closely allied groups of families, as the “graminoids” of the Poaceae, Juncaceae, and Cyperaceae, and the “true ferns.” It is as if “holes” were cut into this taxonomic background in order to recognize a few particularly noteworthy examples. I analyze this phenomenon of “highlighted” generic taxa emerging from a heterogeneous generic background in my “perceptual distance” model of folk biological classification (Hunn 1976).

In any case, we have illustrated two contrasting cases of low recognition ratios. The first fits Berlin´s expectation that species of relative low biological distinctiveness, i.e., members of large congeneric species sets, will be less finely differentiated than the average. The second does not match this expectation, as the low recognition ratios characterize taxa that subsume species sets of high biological distinctiveness, i.e., grouping many species ranging across several genera or even across several families. These cases, as well as the anomalous instances noted of large congeneric species sets exhibiting high recognition ratios require some other rationale. In each case, I believe, cultural salience, i.e., “utility” broadly defined, is the best explanation. Exceptional cultural significance counteracts the expected effect of low biological distinctiveness just as a relative lack of cultural significance can offset a high degree of biological distinctiveness that would otherwise motivate a more refined classification.

As I have argued elsewhere, two additional factors may play a role in driving the recognition ratio: size and ecological salience (Hunn 1999a). Size may be a factor in the high recognition accorded the oaks. (But why not the same focus in pines?) In fact, the majority of the high ratio-low distinctiveness cases are trees (e.g., Acacia, Citrus) or otherwise equally large plants (Agave), while none of the low ratio-high distinctiveness cases are trees. In the guìzh-dǐp case, the distinctive floral characters of the graminoids border on the microscopic.

The effect of ecological salience is less apparent, though perhaps the greater cultural salience of oaks versus pines may reflect the greater abundance and diversity of oaks close to town, with pines achieving their greatest diversity well above town. Ecological salience may also exert an influence “beneath the radar” of this study, as our collections are certainly less comprehensive at higher elevations within the municipio, areas less familiar to most San Juan people, in part due to the chronic and violent dispute between San Juan and its southern neighbor. This dispute has inhibited regular travel above ca. 2700 m for several decades.

In conclusion, we can affirm Berlin´s emphasis on the powerful influence of biological distinctiveness on the “design” of the San Juan botanical classification system, but must qualify this affirmation by recognizing the clear relevance of factors not strictly biological but having to do with the particular perspectives on the flora defined by local cultural adaptations.

3. Nomenclature: primary versus secondary names
Berlin argues that “ethnobiological nomenclature represents a natural system of naming that reveals much about the way people conceptualize the living things in their environment” (1992:26). This is an important and powerful generalization, but must be applied with caution, as languages vary a great deal in the specifics of how nomenclatural patterns map to underlying conceptual structure. Zapotec is a case in point. Specifically, Berlin´s argument that “secondary” names label subgeneric taxa (with a few exceptions noted) does not hold for Zapotec. The reason is simple. Berlin defines secondary names as linguistically complex, productive names [“productive” meaning that the name includes a constituent that labels a superordinate taxon] that occur “only in contrast sets whose members share a constituent that labels the taxon that immediately includes [all of] them” (my clarifications in brackets; 1992:28). He argues that one may distinguish secondary names from similarly complex and productive “primary names” by the fact that the latter “occur as the names for taxa in contrast sets some of whose members are labeled by simple primary names…” (my emphasis; 1992:28). For example, compare the productive secondary name “black oak,” which contrasts with “white oak,” “pin oak,” “water oak,” etc., with the productive primary name “blue bird,” which contrasts not only with “mockingbird” but also with such simple primary names as “cardinal” and “wren.”

In the first instance Berlin would classify the taxa so named (e.g., “black oak”) as of the specific rank. In the second (e.g., “bluebird”), as folk generics. However, he then notes cases of taxa he considers to be folk specifics that are labeled by primary names: 1) type specifics named polysemously by the generic head term (which I treat as covert folk specifics), 2) species of outstanding cultural significance, and 3) cases of abbreviation in which the generic head is optionally deleted. This key distinction between primary and secondary names thus rests on judging whether the exceptions noted above are to be counted as “some of whose members are labeled by simple primary names” or not.

Zapotec poses a problem in this regard for the simple reason that Zapotec plant nomenclature is preferentially trinomial rather than binomial, the pattern Berlin emphasizes. The great majority of Zapotec plant and animal names require that the life-form name be prefixed to the generic specifier, and to both the generic and specific specifiers in the case of a subgeneric taxon. Exceptions are by-and-large limited to Spanish loans, which often do without the life-form prefix. If the analysis rigidly followed Berlin´s strictures, one would be forced to treat yâg `tree/shrub´, guìzh `herbaceous plant´, and guièe `flower´ as gigantic generic taxa each including dozens of “folk specifics.” There are 135 taxa named yàg-X, 80 named guìzh-X, and 74 named guièe-X, X specifying the kind of tree/shrub, herbaceous plant, or “flower” named. The few exceptions, in which kinds of tree/shrub, herbaceous plant, or “flower” do not normally bear the life-form prefix could readily be explained as allowable exceptions under Berlin´s rules

This result is clearly counterproductive, as the categories so named (i.e., yàg-X, guìzh-X, guièe-X) are in every essential respect what Berlin and I understand as folk generic taxa. Furthermore, if we were to treat these 289 “secondary names” as labeling folk specific categories, the number of “folk specifics” would substantially exceed the number of “folk generics” in the system, violating a key expectation of Berlin´s theory.

The Zapotec nomenclatural system is not as extraordinary as this analysis would suggest. In fact, it conforms very well to Berlin´s general scheme, if due allowance is made for the peculiarities of Zapotec plant naming.

4. Taxonomies
Berlin´s theory is perceptual and taxonomic. We are largely in agreement as to the perceptual basis for folk biological classification, viz., that people name categories of plants and animals that are there for all to see, real “natural discontinuities,” as Levi-Strauss noted some time ago (1966), but real “things” that require complex powers of abstraction to recognize. Human babies come into the world well prepared to perform those feats of abstraction. Berlin and I disagree in our emphasis on the motivations that guide the recognition of some perceptual realities but not others, but not on the fundamental role of perceptual patterning for the recognition of natural kinds.

Berlin´s theory is taxonomic in his insistence that the categories recognized are then arranged hierarchically as sets within sets, culminating with a “unique beginner” at a level roughly equivalent to the kingdoms of modern biosystematics. Though some analysts suggest that `plants´ and `animals´ might be grouped at still more abstract and inclusive taxonomic levels as `beings´, `things´, or `entities´ (cf. Conklin 1962), ethnobiological theorizing has opted for the more concrete realities of just two domains, flora and fauna. There are difficulties aplenty within the kingdoms without confronting yet deeper abstractions.

Berlin´s taxonomic model affirms the existence of six universal ethnobiological ranks, that of the kingdom — usually left unnamed — and five subordinate ranks: life form, intermediate, generic, specific, and varietal ^[[LinTaxBer1]]. An individual plant will be classified first of all within a generic taxon. Some fraction of the generic taxa will be polytypic, that is, subdivided into two or more specific taxa, while a very few specifics may be further subdivided into two or more varietals. The great majority of folk generic taxa are subsumed within a small number of life forms. A few oddball generics will remain unaffiliated with any life form. Clusters of generics perceived to be similar or related may be recognized, though rarely named. Berlin considers these clusters to be taxa of the intermediate rank. Such taxa are most often demonstrated by sorting tasks, as I have done in the case of the Zapotec oaks. However, the perceived family resemblance among folk generic taxa that would motivate the recognition of covert intermediate taxa more often defines complex chains of “horizontal” relationships — as opposed to the “vertical” relationships of set inclusion that define the taxonomic hierarchy (cf. Hunn 1975a; Hunn and French 1984) — with ill-defined boundaries that are not always consonant with the notion of contrast set. For that reason, I have chosen to recognized only a handful of covert intermediate taxa in this analysis.

This taxonomic structure has been defined mathematically (Kay 1971, 1975) in set theory by defining the Unique Beginner or Kingdom as the master set that includes every individual plant or animal. This comprehensive set is divided by the generic partition; viz., each individual plant should belong to one and only one folk generic -- each generic taxon including a set of plants that share a “family resemblance” (Wittgenstein 1999, aphorism 67) -- such that the folk generic rank partitions the kingdom.

As noted, a minority of generics are polytypic. These polytypic generics are in turn partitioned by a set of contrasting specific taxa. Polytypic specifics may be partitioned by a set of contrasting varietal taxa. Note that neither the specific nor the varietal ranks partition the kingdom. Intermediates include sets of related generics, as do life forms, but neither life forms nor intermediates fully partition the kingdom.

Berlin believes that the taxa sharing a common rank also share significant psychological properties. Most notably, folk generics will be more information-rich than either more or less inclusive taxa. Atran has tested this hypothesis in a clever series of experiments with Itza Maya and Michigan college students (Atran 1999). Like Berlin, he is convinced of the psychological reality of taxonomic ranks, and insists that every taxon belongs to one and only one rank. I remain highly skeptical on this point (cf. Hunn 1976, 1977; Randall and Hunn 1984).

5. Life forms and other suprageneric taxa
Firstly, life forms are a rather motley crew of taxa, varying in scope, that is, internal heterogeneity, whether measured in terms of the number of folk generic taxa or the range of scientific taxa included. I recognize here “maxi,” “mini,” and “micro” life forms, only half in jest. Life forms also vary in their conceptual basis. The broadest life forms, such as `tree´ or `bird´, pose few problems, as each may include dozens, even several hundred, subordinate folk generic taxa. The near universal recognition of such broad life forms may be based on evolutionary relationships, as in the case of `bird´ (note that `bird´ corresponds rather well with the scientific class Aves, presumed to be a monophyletic group), or to convergent evolution constrained by common problems of adaptation, as the constraints on form imposed by large size in plants that give `trees´ their distinctive outlines (Hunn 1987). However, at the narrow end, life forms may be indistinguishable from the more complex, heterogeneous folk generics, not to mention taxa of intermediate rank.

I recognize the following “greater” or maxi Zapotec life forms, three life forms that each include between 91 and 144 folk generics. These are:

yâg `tree/shrub´, which includes a total of 144 folk generics, including 135 explicitly marked as such (e.g., yàg-X);

guìzh `herbaceous plant´, with a total of 141 folk generics, including 80 preferentially marked as such (e.g., guìzh-X) and another 61 optionally so marked; and

guièe `flower´, with a total of 91 folk generics, including 74 preferentially marked as such (guièe-X) plus another 17 optionally so marked.

The first unusual feature of the Zapotec system is the recognition of `flower´ as a life form. Such a category has not been previously accepted among the potentially universal life forms (Brown 1977; Berlin 1992), perhaps because it has been assumed that to qualify as a life form a taxon should reflect characteristic gross morphological properties as opposed to focusing on some particular part of the plant, such as flower, fruit, leaf, or tuber (for contrary views see Clément 1995; Turner 1987). However, in the Zapotec case the term guièe `flower´ is employed in forming plant names precisely as are yâg and guìzh, two classic universal life forms. Nevertheless, recognizing `flower´ as a life form complicates the taxonomic theory in that the defining presence of a prominent flower may occur on woody trees and shrubs (e.g., yàg-guièe-yǎl, the frangipani tree, Plumeria rubra). As a result, the three Zapotec macro life forms broadly overlap, violating a key expectation of taxonomic theory (see Figure 4.3 ^[[LinLfrPla2]]). One could resolve this anomaly by decree, by ruling that `flower´ is not a truly “taxonomic” category and thus not a life form, but in my view that would be a quite arbitrary and unsatisfactory solution.

Turning next to the “lesser” or mini life forms, I recognize the following, though with some misgivings:

blâg, literally `leaf´, plants with prominent leaves; including a total of 25 generics, 18 preferentially marked as such (blàg-X), plus seven optionally so marked;

lbæ̀ `vine´, with 16 total generics, 10 preferentially marked as such (lbæ̀-X) plus six optionally marked with this life-form term; and

dòb `century plant´, with 12 generics, all explicitly and preferentially marked as dòb-X.

In addition, one might recognize the following “micro life forms” on the basis of nomenclatural and semantic parallels with guièe `flower´ and blâg `leaf´:

gù `tuber´, with six total generics;

ngùd `ball-shaped fruit´, with four total generics; and

bâr̲ `stick´, < Spanish barra, with two generics.

Of these, only `vine´ is normally cited as a “universal” life form. `Leaf´, like `flower´, highlights a particular plant part distinguished by size or, perhaps, utility. This is true as well of the three “micro life forms,” `tuber,´ `ball-shaped fruit,´ and `stick.´ Yet there are certain parallels between the application of these terms and the use of `flower´ in Zapotec plant names that could motivate their consideration as life forms. All may be subsumed by other more inclusive life forms, e.g., yàg-blàg-bnù `tree morning-glory´ (Ipomoea intrapilosa), yàg-ngùd-guèy `white zapote´ (Casimiroa edulis), lbæ̀-gù `potato´ (Solanum tuberosum), gù-blâg `sweet potato´ (Ipomoea batatas).

One other possibility should be considered: ncuàan, literally `medicine´ or `poison´, here `medicinal plant´, which is prefixed in 14 cases to form the names of folk generic taxa. Note that there are well over 200 locally recognized plants with medicinal uses. Therefore, those plants named ncuàan-X do not constitute a medicinal plant taxon, whether life form, intermediate, or generic. ncuàan seems to represent something other than a life form, not only because it is defined in terms of how it is used, but also because it is applied so infrequently to plants with medicinal applications. It is best treated as a component of the generic name, rather than as a life-form prefix.

While ncuàan seems best translated in San Juan Zapotec as `medicine´ or `medicinal plant´, cognate terms in other Zapotec languages often refer to edible wild plants or, to borrow a Nahuatl loan, quelites. It is likely the term once had a parallel meaning in San Juan also, since ncuàan-yê, literally `unripe medicine´, refers to a category closely equivalent to quelite, including a diverse range of herbaceous species, mostly wild but some also cultivated, that are cooked and eaten with meals. This category contrasts with zhlæ̀ `condiments´, which are not considered foods, properly speaking, but are added to meals as flavoring only. San Juan consultants often use ncuàan-yê to refer to the prototypical quelite, the chepiles (Crotalaria spp.), more properly named pxǐizh. Such categories are clearly what Berlin distinguishes as “special purpose” concepts defined not in terms of common intrinsic features of the species included, but in terms of contextual features, in this case, how they are used in the kitchen.

The `century plant´ category stands out in that it is unaffiliated with any other life form, that is, it is neither `tree/shrub´, `herbaceous plant´, nor `flower´, though it has a “tree,” i.e., the giant flower stalk or quiote called yàgùts (as opposed to *yàg-dòb `century plant tree´), and bears “flowers.” I could demote it to the status of a broadly polytypic folk generic, but it would then be an exceptionally heterogeneous example of a taxon of that rank. The 12 taxa named dòb-X belong to five genera in three families recognized by professional botanists. Perhaps one might compromise and call it an intermediate, though unusual in being explicitly named. In any case I count the 12 dòb subtaxa as folk generics, which seems the best solution in my judgment.

There are several Zapotec folk generics that are quite comparable to dòb with respect to their taxonomic range and/or internal complexity, for example:

guìzh-crùz, literally `cross herb´, < Spanish cruz, the true ferns, which incorporates at least 24 fern species of 12 genera in six families (of a total of 48 species of ferns and fern allies of 20 genera in eight families of the Pteridophyta so far recorded for San Juan), and

guìzh-dǐp `grass´, which incorporates at least 43 species of 34 genera in three families.

These two taxa could be considered either small life forms or named intermediates except that they are clearly subsumed by the major life form guìzh. More significant from the perspective of Berlin´s taxonomic theory is the fact that they include relatively poorly defined subcategories in comparison to those of dòb and that both clearly contrast with closely related folk generics. guìzh-crùz includes just three poorly defined subcategories, which by no stretch of the imagination should be considered folk generics, as they should be if guìzh-crùz were an intermediate or life form. guìzh-crùz contrasts with x-pàan-ngùtsiěts `horsetail ferns´ of the Equisetaceae, fern allies though not true ferns, but also with several categories of true ferns notable for their medicinal values or distinctive morphology, such as:

guìzh-bàz, or simply bàz, for which Phlebodium aureolatum is the prototype;

lùdz-mdzìn, literally `deer´s tongue´, prototypically Elaphoglossum spp.;

ncuàan-dzéb-guièel, literally `night fight medicine´, for which Pellaea ovata is the prototype;

ncuàan-dzéb-mæ̀cw, literally `dog fright medicine´, for which Cheilanthes sinuata is the prototype; and

guìzh-guìc-mæ̀cw, literally `dog head herb´, Dryopteris paleacea, named for the large root stock shaped like a dog´s head.

guìzh-dǐp `grass and grass-like plants´ is considered a universal life form by Brown and Berlin. The Zapotec category does include 14 named subtaxa, more than dòb `century plant´ and nearly as many as lbæ̀ `vine´, two of our smaller life forms. However, most of these subtypes seem less than generally recognized and some might be better treated as nonce forms. An exception is guìzh-dǐp-guièe `flowery grass´, Melinus repens, a common weedy grass bearing a showy mass of reddish glumes, also known as guìzh-dǐp-zhǐil, literally `cotton grass´, or guìzh-dǐp-nìzhniê `red grass´. However, as with the ferns, several particularly distinctive grasses are set apart and thus contrast with guìzh-dǐp:

gòob-guì `giant reed´ Arundo donax, a very large African grass cultivated and used in many ways;

zhǒb-bèl `wild oat´ Avena cf. fatua, an important forage grass (but not a kind of zhǒb `maize´, see below);

nìt `sugar cane´ Saccharum officinarum, introduced cultivar; and

zhǒb `maize´ Zea mays.

We should note in this context that the staple crops lbæ̀-bziàa `beans´ Phaseolus vulgaris and zhǒb `maize´ Zea mays, both include a range of subtaxa, mostly Creole land races that are distinguished by morphological details such as size and color of the seed, which are often correlated with maturational rates and preferred soils and elevations. These subtaxa are certainly not what Berlin nor I would consider to be folk generics, having rather the psychological properties of specifics or even of varietals. In each case also, the generic concept has been extended to incorporate introduced cultivars of the same botanical family but of different genera, a pattern described previously for the Tzeltal Maya by Berlin (1972; Berlin, Breedlove, and Raven 1974). These cases are best analyzed as folk generics contrasting within a polysemous (or covert) intermediate category ^[[LinTaxZea1]] ^[[LinTaxPha1]].

In short, I find the boundaries between life forms, intermediates, and generics to be difficult to discern in several instances. It is necessary to balance several at times conflicting considerations to arrive at what seems the most expedient analytical result. I believe these difficulties in the application of Berlin´s taxonomic model to real life data are not due to inadequate data but rather to inadequate theory. Our consultants must classify a complex fabric of family resemblances into a finite set of discrete categories, which may then be named. Except at the species population level, that fabric of biodiversity is not uniformly structured into a hierarchy of discrete sets of contrasting taxa. Thus the conceptual task of reducing the natural fabric to a finite set of discrete taxa of varying degrees of internal heterogeneity involves inevitable compromises and approximations.

6. Where do fungi fit? The fungal domain in Gbëë Zapotec
One last puzzle is the case of měy `mushroom´, or, more precisely, macro-fungi. At first glance this is a life form of moderate complexity, less so than our three macro life forms but somewhat more so than the mini life forms. Like dòb `century plant´ it stands apart from the major dichotomy dividing the plant kingdom into woody and non-woody plants. In fact, it is not clear in which kingdom of living organisms měy belongs.

The standard analytic framework for ethnobiological classification presumes that living things are classified into floral and faunal domains (“kingdoms”), each of which consists of a hierarchical taxonomic structure. The folk generic rank is the foundation of each domain, including in the neighborhood of 500 folk generic taxa each of plants and animals, which represent the most perceptually salient “natural” kinds within the experience of the local community. As noted above, moving down through the taxonomic hierarchy, one may find folk generic taxa subdivided by specific and varietal taxa; moving upwards one finds that the majority of folk generic taxa are subsumed by a few life-form (and perhaps intermediate) taxa.

However, actual folk taxonomies exhibit a number of “irregularities” that require some theoretical refinements to this basic scheme. For example, it has long been recognized that some folk generics will be “unaffiliated” with any life form. These generics are directly included in the “unique beginner,” the kingdom plant or animal. This is attributed to either the perceptual aberrancy of the unaffiliated taxon or some extraordinary cultural significance of the taxon, such as might be associated with domestication (Berlin 1992).

I believe that the Zapotec classification of fungi motivates an extension of unaffiliated status to life forms with respect to the kingdom rank. The Gbëë Zapotec category měy `mushroom´ could be analyzed as either an exceptionally large, heterogeneous folk generic taxon or as a small life form. Each “kind of” mushroom — some 20 are widely recognized — is named binomially (e.g., měy-guìin `chile mushroom´, měy-yâg `wood mushroom´), which might argue in favor of considering these names to be “secondary lexemes” and thus as referring to folk specifics within a single generic taxon. However, as I have noted above, San Juan Zapotec routinely incorporates the life-form name into the names of folk generic plant taxa, e.g., yàg-guièr `pine tree´, guièe-bgùs `spindle flower´, the zinnia. Thus there is no compelling reason to treat měy as other than a life form on a par with yâg `tree/shrub´ and guièe `flower´.

Given that the mushroom life form exhibits a nomenclatural pattern common in the plant domain why not simply treat měy as a plant life form? The problem is that měy begins with m-, which appears to be a prefixed element, a reduced variant of mâ `animal´, a feature shared with a large majority of animal names, e.g., mguǐn̲ `bird´, mèel̲ `snake´, mèedz `wild cats and allies´, and mrè `ant´. This interpretation of the initial m- of měy is further supported by the fact that a negative response to the query, “Are there mushrooms here?” (i.e., when there are none) is “guiènd mâ” `there are no animals´. This contrasts with the appropriate response to the parallel questions: “Are there flowers here?” “guiènd-á” “There are none [inanimate]”; “Are there women here?” “guiènd mé” `There are none [persons].” One consultant responded to my direct question as to whether mushrooms were plants or animals that they were neither.

Mushrooms are “neither fish nor fowl,” that is, neither `plant nor `animal´. Thus, they are affiliated with neither kingdom, though certainly considered to be living things, e.g., they have “life” (guièl̲-mbán) and some claim also that they “have a heart” (rquiànié zdòo); as do many plants, such as maize). Furthermore, the nomenclatural and conceptual structure of the mushroom life form is in no way exceptional.

The simplest solution would seem to be to treat měy as an “unaffiliated life form,” that is, a life form affiliated with neither kingdom, analogous to Berlin´s unaffiliated generics with respect to plant or animal life forms. Lampman's account of Tzeltal Maya ethnomycological classification (2007) documents striking similarities to the San Juan Zapotec data. However, he prefers to treat the Tzeltal macrofungi as constituting a kingdom on a par with though distinct from the Tzeltal plant and animal kingdoms. A valid case could be made for either analytic solution.

7. Subspecific taxa
Something of the same complexity is noted with taxa of the folk generic rank. The distinction between generics, specifics, and varietals at times is blurred by conflicts between the structural position of the taxon, that is, the relationships of inclusion with respect to higher and lower level taxa, and the psychological quality of the taxon, in particular, whether monothetic or polythetic, or better, the degree of “polytheticity,” to introduce a neologism. Generic taxa are prototypically complexly polythetic, capable of definition only in terms of a concatenation of co-varying features expressed as a coherent gestalt (Hunn 1976). The prototypical folk generic taxon bears a simple primary name and corresponds to a single highly distinctive biological species. For example, blâg-wè is Wigandia urens, a common and conspicuous tall weedy shrub or small tree and a species with no close relatives in the region to confuse the issue. The huge leaves covered with irritating hairs motivate its inclusion in the life form blâg `leaf´.

Varietal taxa, at the opposite extreme, are prototypically monothetic, that is, defined by a single contrasting quality, such as color, shape, or size. For example, bziàa-dùuzh-nguěts `yellow string beans´, which contrast with bziàa-dùuzh-ngǎs `black string beans´ according to the color of the beans. Both varieties are “string beans,” that is, bush beans with edible pods.

Specific taxa may be monothetic or polythetic, thus not of a single psychological type. Bziàa-dùuzh `string bean´, for example, is a specific distinguished by several co-varying attributes, growth form and edibility of the pod, and is thus more polythetic than the varietal bziàa-dùuzh-nguěts `yellow string beans´, which is monothetic. Neither is as complexly polythetic as the generic bziàa. However, bziàa also directly includes non-string bean varieties distinguished only by color, or by just color and size, e.g., bziàa-ngǎs `black beans´ and bziàa-guiès, a large black bean. These specifics are psychologically more like the varietal bziàa-dùuzh-nguěts than the specific bziàa-dùuzh `string bean´, though as immediate subdivisions of the generic they must be considered specifics rather than varietals ^[[LinTaxPha1]]. At issue is the question of what the taxonomic theory should explain, the taxonomic structure or the underlying psychological properties of taxa? I believe that Berlin is primarily concerned to account for the conceptual realities underlying folk biological classification, not the formal structure. But as structural considerations define the taxonomic ranks, when structural position and psychological process are at odds, the theory fails the conceptual test.

8. Conclusions
In conclusion, we should reiterate the many ways that San Juan plant classification and nomenclature fits well with Berlin´s theoretical expectations (Berlin 1992:31-35). In particular, with regard to categorization, the San Juan Gbëë system of ethnobiological classification:

1) recognizes a very substantial subset of the biologically distinctive species of the local habitat;

2) this system is based primarily on the affinities that humans observe among the taxa themselves, quite independent of the actual or potential cultural significance of those taxa;

3) this system is organized conceptually into a shallow hierarchic structure;

4) taxa… [are] distributed among … four to six … ethnobiological ranks, e.g., a covert kingdom, several life forms, and intermediate, generic, specific, and varietal taxa;

5) with regard to folk generic taxa:

5a) folk generics are by far the most numerous taxa, closely approximating the modal value of 500 (452 to be precise), of which roughly 80% are monotypic (75% in our case), and most are included in one [or more] superordinate life form;

5b) life forms are few and broadly polytypic [though quite variable in size and substance];

5c) intermediates are rarely named and elusive, mediating life form and generic ranks,

5d) specifics are fewer than generics and varietals are rare,

6) generic and specific taxa (at least) may exhibit an internal structural contrast between prototypical and less typical members, and

7) the great majority of Zapotec generic and specific plant taxa correspond closely to modern scientific phylogenetic categories, most often to scientific species or genera, while life forms correspond poorly.

With regard to nomenclatural regularities, we may affirm that:

1) kingdom and intermediate taxa are covert, with few exceptions;

2) plant names represent well-known lexeme types, simple, unproductive complex forms, and productive compounds, i.e., polynomials.

On the other hand, Berlin´s distinction between primary and secondary lexemes does not apply. Also, contrary to Berlin´s expectations, the correspondence of name types, structural positions, and psychological processes underlying the recognition of taxa is less than straightforward. The San Juan Gbëë ethnobotanical classification system and associated nomenclature has much in common with other well-studied systems, despite dramatic differences in language and habitat, but exhibits complexities that warrant fundamental revisions in the currently dominant perceptual/taxonomic theory.