
    coordinator review
    score 5/5

      Type of Submission

        Anthropology, Cognitive Science

      The Review

        This is an excellent, highly original, and significant paper and exemplary for the
        type of contributions that I would wish CogSci had more of.
        The paper presents high-quality work in a discipline that is central to, yet
        grossly underrepresented in Cognitive Science, namely cognitive anthropology. It
        deals with a topic that has a long tradition in cognitive science (i.e., concepts
        and categories), and hence should be of interest to the community. The methods are
        technically sound – in fact: advanced and innovative – and both the detailed
        description of the data sets and making them publicly available is exemplary. The
        paper is convincingly argued, well-written, and accessible to the broad CogSci
        audience, especially so as the authors take a cross-disciplinary angle and
        approach. The findings, finally, even if somewhat tentative (as stated by the
        authors), are stimulating in that they support only some of the hypotheses (e.g.,
        that species frequency affects the extension of the category), while those linked
        to category labelling are not confirmed. Both findings and implications for
        existing theories (such as those on communicative efficiency) as well as open
        questions for future work are discussed on a high level.

    ----------------------------------------------------------------

    reviewer 1 review
    score 0/5

      Type of Submission

        Anthropology, Psychology

      The Review

        In their first analysis the authors hypothesise that frequency (i.e., occurrence
        in a database of bird counts) and mass (i.e., bird size) predict whether a species
        is likely to be named. While I would also expect an effect of how common a bird
        is, I don't quite follow the logic to include mass as this is not intuitively the
        most informative feature when categorising birds (which do vary but are often
        quite similar in size). I would have like to have seen  the full regression model
        statistics and specifications, as far as I understand the model comparisons showed
        no effect of mass yet a coefficient and corresponding probability are reported.

        In the second analysis, it becomes clear why mass was included. According to the
        results presented mass is a better predictor of category size than frequency,
        however the effect sizes are quite small. Again I would have liked to see the full
        model statistics here. The third analysis discusses name-length but is rather
        brief. Here effects of frequency and mass are reported but model comparisons
        favour a model including only mass. The fourth analysis discusses compound names
        and is rather opaque, results are argued to be consistent with the findings on
        name length but no effect of either frequency or mass is found in model
        comparisons.
        Finally, prototypicality is discussed in a way that is very broadly in line with
        the psychological notion put forward by Rosch, but skips over a lot of nuances of
        prototypical representation. Here, no results are included outside of the
        illustrative graphs, so the hypothesis that frequency 'predicts' typicality is
        impossible to verify.


        In conclusion:
        Coming from a psychology background I found the structure of this paper confusing,
        with the introduction blending almost seemlessly into a combined results and
        method section. The question/hypotheses were outlined very broadly and variables
        were only briefly introduced so their theoretical relevance was not always clear.
        Consequently, this work feels very exploratory.

        I appreciate the author's efforts to report both significant and non-significant
        results. However, I would have liked to see a clearer report of their results. The
        coefficients are reported as if there was an effect, but model comparisons show
        that there was none. Full model statistics would have been appreciated, as well as
        full results for the analysis on prototypes.

    ----------------------------------------------------------------

    reviewer 2 review
    score 2/5

      Type of Submission

        Anthropology, Cognitive Science, Linguistics, Psychology

      The Review

        This paper explores how external factors in the environment affects language used
        for bird categorization. The authors ground their work in previous work that
        investigates this topic and focus on the frequency of birds being observed in the
        environment. Using an aggregate of bird frequency, size, and naming data, they
        tested the effect of frequency and other factors on patterns in categorization and
        in the names of categories. They found that in both cases frequency only has a
        weak effect, dominated by perceptual similarity.

        This work is interesting as it makes novel use of new sources of data to explore
        the classic question on the relationship between categorization and environment.
        Overall the analyses and the assumptions they are based on seem reasonable for
        exploratory purposes. Even though the methods are simple as noted by the authors,
        their novel approach seems promising for similar future research concerning the
        effect of environmental factors on language use or categorization. Overall the
        paper is well written. Since the work lies on the intersection of anthropology,
        psychology, and linguistics, it should be interesting to a general cognitive
        science audience. However, due to the exploratory nature of this work, I recommend
        accepting the full paper or abstract plus poster.

    ----------------------------------------------------------------

    reviewer 3 review
    score 5/5

      Type of Submission

        Biology, Cognitive Science, Linguistics

      The Review

        The literature review is extensive, the research outline is well described, the
        methodology is sound, and the results are original, significant, clear and amply
        discussed. As such, we do recommend this research as a "full paper plus talk"
        contribution to the conference. However, we believe the following points need to
        be adressed beforehand:

        Has a quality assessment of the eBird database been done in the past? If so, it
        might be in order to talk about it in the data sets section. In any case, much
        information is given as regards to the reliability of the database. Whether
        experience- or reference-based, this feedback obviously comes from somewhere, but
        not information is given is given in that regard. We believe this should be
        rectified.

        Also a note concerning Zipf's law. In its standard and best-known form, it doesn't
        relate frequency to word length, but rather to rank. Also, given that there is
        extensive and recent literature on that subject, citing only Zipf's two books
        seems a bit superficial. For more information on this subject, we recommend the
        following article: Piantadosi S. 2014. Zipf’s word frequency law in natural
        language: A critical review
        and future directions. Psychon Bull Rev. 21(5): 1112–1130



        